With arrays, booleans, objects, numbers and strings, we had a look at the most important or almost all
of the most important data types
you have in Javascript but there are two additional important data types and one strange value which
looks like a data type and that would be null, undefined and NaN. Now what's that?
These are kind of special values, though null and undefined are both values and data types.
So what's the idea behind that? Undefined is the default value uninitialized variables have,
so if you create a variable and you don't assign a value at the beginning with the equal sign, then this
variable is undefined.
We also saw undefined in the log when we try to access an element in the array at an index where
no element was created yet,
then we tried to access an element which wasn't there and therefore we got back a value of undefined.
So that's a value, it's a value that indicates that nothing's there but at the same time, it's also a separate
data type.
So just like numbers and strings are a data type, undefined is also a data type actually. Now you should
never assign undefined to a value on your own,
so never write equals undefined because that's just a default value you have if something has never
been assigned a value.
Now you could have cases in your code where you indeed get something, where you're not sure if it's undefined
or not and later you will learn how you can check whether a value is defined or undefined but it's
already important to be aware of this type.
Now related to this, there is the null value and type.
Now it's very similar to undefined, it means that there is no data but undefined is the default value
for variables and so on where you never assigned a new value. Null is never a default value on the other
hand,
instead you have to set something to null to use that value
and that's often used if you want to reset or clear a variable, let's say you have some user input
and you want to reset this,
you could set it to an empty string but you could also set it to null for example, to make it clear in
your program that there currently shouldn't be a value because no value has been entered or whatever.
And again this is especially useful later if we can also run some checks, some conditional checks with
if statements to find out if a value is set and then do something or if it's not set. So undefined and null
are important to manage empty data, either because it never was set or because you want to set it to
empty, to null.
They're very similar but they're not entirely equal because of the reasons I explained.
Now there also is one other special value and that's NaN, that stands for not a number
and technically, unlike undefined and null which also are their own types,
this is not a type,
instead it's of type
number, it's not its own type and you can therefore use it in calculations where you work with numbers.
Now the idea behind NaN is that it's kind of like an error code
if you run a calculation with something that doesn't include a number, so if you have let's say a multiplication
with text or anything like that, then you would get not a number as a result
and if you use the not a number value in that calculation, you also get not a number as a result.
So this yields not a number if you use it in calculations and it's the result of calculations that are
invalid.
Now you might wonder why you would ever run an invalid calculation,
keep in mind that Javascript allows you to write highly dynamic code.
So like in the case of our calculator here, you could have a calculator where users can enter any value,
where they are maybe not forced to enter a number and where therefore you could run a calculation with
some user input which is not a number
and then you could get such a not a number result.
Again this is most useful if you also have the abilities of comparing it or of checking it with some
if statement to run some code if you get such an invalid result
but it is worth being aware of this type. Now to quickly give you an idea of these types,
let's clear that Javascript console here because here we also can type some Javascript code which runs
immediately, which is immediately evaluated
and here I want to show you these three types I just talked about. Let's create a variable here,
userName maybe and not set this equal to anything, just like this,
so we declare it but we don't initialize it.
If we now hit enter, you see undefined here because that's the return value of this execution here
but if you now write console log
userName
or actually here in the console you can just write userName and it will automatically log into the
console, you'll see the value that's in there and that's also undefined.
Now of course if I now assign a value like Max and I print this, you see
Max here, it also showed it here.
So that's one thing, we got undefined if we haven't set this to a value yet.
Now if we would want to reset this, as I mentioned you should never do this,
technically this would work but this is not recommended,
instead you should set this to null now,
this other special value and if you do that and you have a look into userName now, you see this indeed
is null. Now for the not a number example,
if you run three times hi here, you see the result is not a number. If you run three times not a number
which is also a special value written like this,
you also get another number.
So these are the special types which, for now, you should just keep in memory somewhere and which we'll
come back to throughout the course when we'll be able to check for whether a variable has a value or
not,
for now just loosely keep these values in mind.